
# Informatics rotation project for 1st rotation 2016-17

## Project description:

### Understanding the genetic architecture of inflammatory bowel disease using genome-wide data across tens of thousands of individuals
#### Supervisors: Drs Carl Anderson and Jeffrey Barrett
http://www.sanger.ac.uk/science/groups/anderson-group
http://www.sanger.ac.uk/science/groups/barrett-team

Crohnâ€™s disease and ulcerative colitis, the two common forms of inflammatory
bowel disease (IBD), are chronic and debilitating diseases of the
gastrointestinal tract that result from the interaction of environmental
factors, including the intestinal microbiota, with the host immune system in
genetically susceptible individuals. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS)
have identified 236 IBD associated loci, many of which are also associated with
other immune-mediated disease. The success of GWAS studies of IBD, and more
generally, has been built on the use of the additive genetic model where each
additional copy of a disease-associated allele contributes an equal additional
increase in disease risk. However, in some notable cases, such as the NOD2 and
TYK2 genes, it has been clearly shown that having two copies of the disease
allele offers substantially more risk than expected, more akin to a recessive
model.

This rotation project will investigate non-additive genetic effects at the vast
majority of IBD loci that have not yet been studied in this way to see what
role this plays in disease risk. You will explore the extent to which dominant
and recessive effects influence susceptibility to inflammatory bowel disease
using genetic data at 20 million variant positions in our large cohort of
17,000 cases and 19,000 controls. These analyses are a starting point for
understanding a wide range of questions about disease biology. For example, can
such models improve genetic risk prediction, or identify precisely which
genetic variants actually cause disease?

Depending on the time remaining, possible extensions include searching for gene
x gene interactions and quantifying the genetic correlation between disease
phenotypes using LD-score regression. This project can be tailored to suit the
computational expertise of the student and can be easily extended into a full
PhD project with the aim of using high coverage whole genome sequence data to
better understand the genetic architecture of IBD.

### Misc.

src/
    Scripts intended to be executed should have chmod +x set.
    Other scripts are helpers executed by other scripts.
    Scripts with BSUB comment lines are intended to be bsub-ed.
